---
layout: post
title: "Ko Ngai"
categories: travel, thailand, kongai
author: Wil
---

## Saturday 19th March

Still fresh from Flavio's near-death experience, we checked in at *Kaimuk Thong*, then went to the bar for tea, coffee, and beer. We maintained this state of existence for the rest of the day. It was a lovely place: our little bungalow was about 30m from the beach, across a little grassy area shaded by coconut palms and littered with sun loungers, tables and cabanas. The water was a brilliant, pure pale blue for a stretch of about 200m away from the beach, at which point its colour darkened significantly. We later learned that this represents the edge of a sheer submarine shelf, which gave me the heebie-jeebies (I am definitely a steadfast thalassophobe). For dinner I had a pad thai, and Ellen had something with very al dente chicken that we can't really remember much about. We walked out to the beach once the tide had gone out, careful to avoid the numerous starfish that had been washed ashore. On the advice of Not-Grandma at Ko Lanta's Old Town, we resolved to get up early the next morning to see the sun rise and so retired to bed relatively early, but not before Ellen absolutely wiped the floor with me at cribbage.

## Sunday 20th March

To the great surprise of us both, we actually managed to get up at 06:00 in the morning, and so stumbled our way over to the beach in slight disbelief. There was a huge flock of hornbills in a tree jutting out over the beach---they each had an additional large protrusion at the tops of their bills, which looked incredibly unwieldy. Soon the sun appeared behind the limestone karsts to the east (beyond which was the Thai mainland), and the refracted light cast a lovely palette of colours through the clouds and across the wet sand in front of us. We noticed a chap sleeping in a hammock strung up on one of the longtail boats that were sitting on the sand---he was one of the fishermen who provided the hospitality on the island with their fresh catches each day.

Once the sun had risen we returned to bed for a few hours, then commenced the first of two rigorous days on *Ko Ngai* by immediately heading to the sun loungers after a (fairly disappointing) breakfast of congee for me, and the somewhat unusual combination of eggs, toast and chicken for Ellen. We lounged, we read, we drank beer. Ellen took a dip in the sea. We had planned to kayak the mile or so east out to *Ko Ma*, but the wind was so changeable that we decided against it. One thing we did achieve, however, was the identification of the loquacious bird that had thus far plagued us on our travels. Ever since Phuket, a holier-than-though, whistled "Ooooh", like something from a Carry-On film, had emanated from treetops wherever we went. (For anyone whistling along at home, start at any pitch, then go up about a minor third, then down a perfect fifth.) I had almost come to the conclusion that it was a sassier version of the Wind-Up Bird from Haruki Murakami's eponymous chronicle, which is never seen but whose ratcheting cry heralds otherworldly or otherwise despicably violent events, so was relieved to find that it was indeed corporeal. It was an Asian Koel, a member of the cuckoo family that also practices brood parasitism i.e. is also a bastard.

We walked a little way north along the beach, and had an ok lunch at *Ko Hai Seafood* (*Ko Hai* being an alternative romanisation of the island's name: the true sound seemed to be somewhere between *ng* and *h*, which begs the question---why not just romanise to *Ko Nghai*?). It seemed that there were very few other guests at any of the island's resorts, or indeed people anywhere else on the island: *Ko Ngai* supposedly supports no population other than tourists and resort staff. There were no shops on the island---all food and supplies were brought by boat, most likely either from *Ko Lanta*, *Ko Muk* or the mainland. That being said, a man with a truly unforgivable mullet-style hairdo who frequented *Kaimuk Thong* appeared to be a permanent resident, quite possibly at *Kaimuk Thong* itself. He had his own dinghy, for which we saw him carving oars, and seemed to be the owner of a mellow, grey-muzzled black dog who was happily plodding around the beach.

That evening, we wandered further south along the 2km stretch of beach, across some tide-washed boulders and through a small stretch of jungle covering the rocky southeastern shoulder of the island, to take a look at *Ko Ngai Resort*---we were considering staying somewhere else the following night to mix things up a bit, and it was the only other reasonably-priced accommodation that wasn't within a stone's throw of *Kaimuk Thong*. We emerged from the jungle track into a ghost town. I was reminded of *Gunkanjima* (or *Battleship Island*) off the coast of Nagasaki in Japan, which once housed thousands of coal miners and their families, and was temporarily used as a forced-labour camp during the second World War, but whose high-rise apartment buildings now lie abandoned and derelict, frozen in time. It was very creepy: I almost expected the Grady Twins to appear at any moment.

Before *Polymorphia* could strike up, we hastened (as best we could) back along the jungle trail---wordlessly resolving to stay another night at *Kaimuk Thong*---before arriving at *Thanya's*, another resort on the southern end of the beach. We had dinner and a few drinks, during which the ginormous head of a tokay gecko slowly appeared from behind the pillar next to Ellen. It was incredible! Its head was about the size of a child's fist, and from head-to-tail the whole thing was about the length of my forearm. We were even lucky enough to hear its territorial/mating call: a low shuddering noise, a bit like the football-rattle noise that magpies make but lower-pitched and far less harsh, followed by several loud cries of "Ge-Koh", each syllable separated by an interval of a perfect fifth or a minor sixth (have already mentioned musical intervals in this post: in for a penny, in for a pound). The closest---and most melodramatic---approximation I can make for the latter sound is the barks of the velociraptors in the *Jurassic Park* series of films.

By the time we left it was dark, so we worked our way back to *Kaimuk Thong* by the light of Ellen's head torch (she was thrilled, having been waiting for an excuse to use it ever since we arrived in Thailand). Crabs of all sizes were darting to and fro in the light, and for a while we stopped and watched a hermit crab the size of a satsuma as it bumbled along.

## Monday 21st March

We returned to *Thanya's* for breakfast---I had a mixed fruit plate and Ellen had a pandan pancake. We had recently learned both that our flights to Siem Reap had been cancelled (without reason), and that Vietnam had once again opened to tourists, so we spent a relatively unsuccesful half-an-hour or so trying to sort out some logistics. We also considered booking our return flights to the UK in six weeks' time: there were some incredibly cheap options out of Singapore, but there didn't seem to be a way to fly back that didn't involve at least three layovers. Without really knowing where we'd be nearer the date, we decided to give up for the time being.

We returned to the sun loungers at *Kaimuk Thong*, which we shared with the local ant population for the next few hours. Later on, we walked up to the northern end of the beach---further than the previous day---passing a small army of cats, including a fluffy ginger kitten with eyes so enormous even my weary and atrophied heart felt a glimmer of warmth. We had dinner at *Coco Cottage*, which was superb---massaman curry for Ellen and a panang for me. I also had a *Cookie Monster* milkshake, seemingly much to the amusement of our waitress.

We were entertained by a small gecko who was running in and out of the light shade by our table. It is truly amazing how they can stick to *anything*. My tutor in university was slightly obsessed with geckos (according to him so was the US Military, because they "wanted to make Spiderman"): for a critical appraisal assignment he once gave me an article that demonstrated how, using countless microscopic hairs on the pads of their feet, they actually chemically bond to surfaces using Van der Waals forces---the same force that, for example, holds individual atoms of hydrogen together to form molecular hydrogen. Naturally, critiquing an article from a physics journal was somewhat beyond my abilities as a pharmacy undergraduate, but I *did* learn that apparently geckos can even stick to Teflon.

We played cribbage again, and again the metaphorical floor was rendered clean by my person. Once more donning the head torches for the walk home, we were this time treated to some sort of hermit crab royal rumble about halfway back along the beach. Four of them were gathered around a fifth crab in the centre---the largest, again probably about the size of a small orange---who appeared to be being held in place by one of the smaller ones. One crab approached and there was some violent antenna clashing, before a fumbling claw moved in from the attacker, causing the victim to withdraw whilst defending himself with his legs. Another crab approached from the other side, but at this, the crab holding the victim in place just sort of chucked him forward, and the whole group disbanded. The approacher wandered after the victim and there was some friendly(?) antenna mingling, before they went their separate ways, leaving little trails in the wet sand as they hauled their outsourced carapaces along. Neither of us had any idea what had just happened---possibly a bit of shell envy?---but it was amazing to have seen.

Back at *Kaimuk Thong* we were met with terrible news: the resort's supply of beer had run out. Acutely aware of the sheer volume of *Chang* we had consumed in the past 48 hours, we sheepishly trudged back to our bungalow for the last time, the crippling weight of responsibility bearing heavily across our shoulders. The wind-up bird continued to sing his mocking song.
