---
layout: post
title: "Ko Lanta"
categories: travel thailand
author: Wil
---

## Tuesday 15th March

After hopping on a speedboat at Ton Sai harbour on Ko Phi Phi Don (and thoroughly zoning out to the wonderful drone of its engine for the hour-long journey: with all the overtones, I almost imagined I could hear Tuvan throat singing), we arrived mid-morning at Ban Saladan on the island's northwestern side. We got a pink tuktuk to New Coconut Bungalows (NCB) in Khlong Khong, as recommended by Maire & Roger who had previously stayed there. The driver tried to overcharge us, but we accidentally haggled him down just by walking off and saying, "No, thank you." Upon arrival at NCB we were met by Zha, who gave us each a mystery red drink, and who was very impressed with my passport photo. He didn't say anything about Ellen's (but did later comment that her face "looked nice" when she had taken off her mask).

NCB had some raised, shaded decking right on the beachfront, with a view out west over the sea. Numerous craggy rocks became visible as the tide went out. I had a green curry stir fry to eat, and Ellen had yellow noodle. We also had some Leo (beer!). Afterwards, we went for a walk along the beach---where there were loads of small hermit crabs shuffling about---found a shady spot and had a snooze: not long into the snooze, we had to flee from the 1.5cm ants who presumably lived there and were unhappy with our intrusion.

Ellen got a fresh coconut at Coco Bar, and I had a coconut smoothie which was similar but with ice and the pulp added. We then wandered back down the beach, marvelling at the numerous crab burrows surrounded by beautiful patterns, like circular mazes whose walls were composed of tiny balls of sand each a few millimetres in diameter. Having looked this up, I think these must have been sand bubbler crab burrows: the tiny balls of sand are deposited after they have filtered organic matter from it using their mouthparts. These are destroyed when the tide comes in, but the crab survives inside a bubble of air within its burrow.

We stopped at *another* "Freedom Bar", this time heavily reggae themed (the obligatory Bob Marley soundtrack was present and correct), where we had a beer and watched the sun set. The staff carried out what looked like Molotov cocktails, set them in a pile of sand and then lit them. Light was provided by lanterns which looked like buoys with holes drilled in them. (They were a lot nicer than that makes them sound!) Supposedly the bar is usually a hotspot for nightlife, but you would never have guessed it: there were very few people there and it was pretty quiet.

We went to a restaurant called *Three Sisters* for dinner, just along the main road from our bungalow. It was excellent, and very cheap. Ellen had a Massaman curry, and I had fried cashew nuts with chicken and vegetables. The roti with Ellen's curry was so good, we had to order a second. Despite how amazingly cheap they were, I was too full to squeeze in a dessert: I vowed not to make the same mistake again.

## Wednesday 16th March

Little of interest to write about today, but it was great. Pretty much just chilled on the decking near our bungalow, read, and played cards, after having breakfast at *Sonya's*, which was on the corner of the little road leading to our bungalow. I had a fabulous mixed fruit plate---mango, watermelon, pineapple, orange banana dragon fruit---and Ellen had avocado on toast. This was our first day without any booze... Until I remembered about the big bottle of Singha in the fridge, which I heroically drank that evening so that we didn't have to carry it with us to our next hotel, after wrestling the lid off with a coin and a key given the lack of a bottle opener. Ellen gave me a swimming lesson in the pool: I am now slightly closer to being able to breaststroke.

One significant downside to Ko Lanta is that every beachfront bar seems to have agreed to play the same punishingly bad playlist, composed entirely of milquetoast covers of middle-of-the-road pop songs, 1980s cheese-rock, Maroon 5 (shudder), or just otherwise nondescript, naff, unremarkable contemporary pop music. I really hope we escape this as we continue to move south-east.

We made friends with Porchy, a little black and white cat who came over and started chatting to us whenever we approached the door to our bungalow. He was very keen to get into the room: once we'd discouraged him, he would then settle down and loaf on the veranda with us.

We went back to *Three Sisters* for dinner. Shamelessly breaking my vow, I again ate too much to have a dessert.

## Thursday 17th March

In the morning we went to *Sonya's* again---I had the same as before, Ellen had French Toast---then got a taxi (or rather, an expensive lift with one of Sonya's mates) over to the Old Town of Ko Lanta, also known as Ban Si Raya. We checked into our hotel (Tonsai Suites) and met one of the owners, a Floridian called Jen. We were disappointed to learn that the *Laanta Lanta* festival---which celebrates some of the island's traditions dating back a couple of centuries, as well as the *chao ley* culture that is prominent in the area---was not scheduled to occur this year due to Covid-19. Usually, so we thought, it occurs during the full moon in March: we had headed over the day before the full moon, hoping to catch the festivities. (Assuming I understood her correctly, I later learned from one of the Old Town's residents that the dates of the festival are in fact the 7th--9th March.)

We walked through the old town, via the island's only Chinese shrine, to the pier. The old town was somewhat reminiscent of Phuket's Old Town in terms of the designs of the shop fronts---open-fronted, many of them with beautiful wooden screen doors---though there was seemingly none of the Sino-Portuguese influence on the architecture. The inhabitants were notably more amiable than the other side of Lanta (who had nonetheless been friendly), and despite the numerous bars and restaurants lining the seafront, the town felt far less touristy than the resort-heavy west coast of the island where we had been staying previously. The pier offered a beautiful view over the numerous small limestone islands nearby: the mainland was faintly visible on the horizon. We went for food and beer on one of the old stilted verandas over the sea, where we watched some of the locals collecting cockles/shellfish from the rocks below, and marvelled as a sea eagle cruised overhead. At the restaurant was the noisiest cat in the world---even noisier than our friends Dave and Maddie's cat Fudge---who would approach people and meow relentlessly until some attention was paid to her. This seems to be a common personality trait amongst Thai cats. Ellen gave her some egg from her pad Thai (I figured she would not have appreciated my papaya salad), after which she fully inverted under a nearby table and had a snooze.

We returned to the hotel and had some beers with the other owner, a genial Scotsman named Darren who appeared to maintain a mental tally of the exact number of his Caledonian brethren on the island at any given time. (Later, after he had left, one of his friends came looking for him: when he spoke to Ellen, he asked, "Are you the Scottish one?!") He had five cats that he had adopted (and was desperately trying to resist the urge to adopt a sixth that was hanging around the hotel): Miss Tickles; Mr Whiskers; Big Shite; Wee Shite; and Lady Shite. Sadly we didn't meet the Shites, but whilst playing cards that evening we did make very good friends with the adorable Miss Tickles, who had a slightly unnerving habit of gently nibbling nearby body parts: at one point, while she was sitting on the hotel counter, she tried to give me an impromptu nipple piercing. Yes, I realise that a considerable portion of this blog is devoted to descriptions of cats.

We headed back out to one of the restaurants-on-stilts for a beer in the evening, before returning to the hotel where, much to our disappointment, Miss Tickles was no longer to be found.

## Friday 18th March

During our previous day's conversation with Darren (who, sadly, we didn't see again before leaving), we had mentioned our plan to head over to Ko Ngai (also romanised to Ko Hai). Transport between the islands was proving difficult---and fairly expensive---as none of the ferries were running due to low demand in the wake of the (or, let's be honest, the ongoing) Covid-19 pandemic. Darren had vouched for the local travel agent, Sunny, so we paid her a visit in the morning. Her tiny shop was empty when we arrived, with a food stall outside: someone from the house across the road called out to us, and shortly afterwards Sunny appeared. We had previously seen a flyer for the *Four Islands Cruise*, a trip by longtail boat to several of the nearby islands, including Ko Ngai, so we inquired about it. Sunny informed us that, if we liked, the boatmen could drop us off at Ko Ngai's east-facing beach at the end of the trip, so we booked the trip for the next morning.

Sunny recommended *Grandma's House* for breakfast, and it was only a few doors down so we toddled straight over. We met a retired Canadian couple who were staying in one of the stilt houses over the sea, and chatted to them for a while: they'd been in Thailand for months, having travelled down from Chiang Mai in the north, about which they waxed lyrical. We had some home-baked sourdough for breakfast on the Canadians' recommendation, and once they'd left, we had a chat with the slightly distracted owner (not Grandma, we don't think) of the cafe: it turned out that her father was having what sounded like a heart attack, and she was in the process of getting a medical opinion from a cardiologist friend by WhatsApping them a copy of his echocardiogram! Her husband was taking her father to Krabi---a 2 hour drive at best, depending on the timing of the car ferry to the mainland---because she claimed the local hospital was "full of Covid". Depending on the opinion from her friend, her father might then be flown to Bangkok for medical intervention. We were both pretty horrified, simultaneously feeling immensely grateful for the NHS and the rapid availability of high-quality care in the UK, but also acutely aware of the stark inequalities in healthcare faced by some people.

In between phone calls, she continued to chat to us, to my horror suggesting that we get up very early (05:30!) on Ko Ngai to see "the bird with the big beak", which it turned out were Hornbills. While Ellen went to get some more cash, I also had a scoop of home-made coconut icecream---"No machine"---which was *wonderful*. As we left and said where we were headed (Ao Phra Ae, on the other side of the island), Not-Grandma apologised and said that, ordinarily, she'd get her husband to give us a lift, but that he was a bit busy driving her father to the mainland!

Earlier, Sunny had said that she'd book us a taxi when we were ready to head over to Ao Phra Ae, so we popped back in to see her. She waved to a man in a grubby vest across the road, who had one of his flip-flop things between his second and third toes, and a one-inch, thickened brown nail on his left thumb. We bartered a little for a lower fare (the "start walking off" technique worked again): once we'd agreed, he moved his tuktuk and Sunny's food stall from in front of the garage next to her shop, and shortly afterwards a younger man appeared from within, driving a sizeable SUV. His name was "Bird".

So began the most terrifying journey of the holiday to date (though, unbeknownst to us, it would soon be surpassed by [our first trip to the Emerald Cave]({% post_url 2022-03-31-four-islands-tour %}) on Ko Muk). Bird drove about twice as fast as our previous chauffeur, straddling the centre line and tearing along east Lanta's winding, unevenly-developed roads---once, we were bounced out of our seats as we ploughed through a pothole. I winced more than once as he careered past drivers on tuktuks and motor scooters: he approached one left turn at such speed I was *sure* that the family on a scooter waiting to pull out on the other side were about to be wiped from the gene pool.

After a brief stop at the *Viewpoint Cafe*, which offered a fine vista over the eastern sea and the mainland, we hesitantly climbed back into Bird's SUV for the remainder of the journey to Ao Phra Ae. A mercifully short time later we had arrived at *Baan Ok Chawkoh Bungalows*, where we would stay the night. When I passed the owner my passport, he commented on the fact that I was from Cardiff, which he knew was in Wales because he was a football fan! I should have mentioned Gareth Bale, like Tomo says he's done in Nigeria in the past.

As is (probably) well documented in the medical literature, the only certain way to recover after a near-death experience is with a cold beer. Reluctantly submitting to expert medical opinion, we made the five minute walk to the beach, found a cabana flush with bean bags, and recovered for several hours. Once the sun had started to set (and another huge thunderstorm had begun far to the east), we headed to *May's Kitchen*, another recommendation from the Canadian couple. We shared a massaman pizza (as good as it sounds), deep-fried spare ribs (very deep-fried) and some stir-fried morning glory (as good as ever). Still reeling from the disappointment of missing out on dessert *twice* at *Three Sisters*, we went completely overboard and ordered *three* desserts: mango sticky rice, pineapple fritters, and deep-fried ice cream---yes, *deep-fried ice cream*. Thailand has officially outscotlanded Scotland.

As the night progressed, I became more and more aware of the unusual vibe in the "bar" next door. Several young women were sitting out the front, dressed slightly less modestly than most other Thai women we'd seen on the island. With them were a couple of slightly older women. None of them had a drink, and were mainly just quietly looking at their phones and occasionally exchanging a few words, but whenever a group of men walked past they would simultaneously erupt in enthusiastic greeting. In went a man who looked uncannily like Santa Claus, and, after finishing his meal at *May's*, a rather corpulent man hauled himself over and had a very long conversation with the women out front. Perhaps sensing my glaring, he hopped on his (unfortunate) moped and sped off into the night.
