---
layout: post
title: "Ko Muk"
categories: travel thailand
author: Wil
---

## Tuesday 22nd March

In the morning, the lovely chap at *Kaimuk Thong* booked us a "speedboat" to *Ko Muk*, which he told us departed at 11:00. We were slightly puzzled at how a speedboat would berth, given that the only pier on the island was the (definitely haunted) one at *Ko Ngai Resort*. Instead, at 11:00 a longtail boat showed up at the beach just outside *Kaimuk Thong*, and we were shepherded aboard. By this point we had learned not to ask questions of Thai transport arrangements. We pootled off south towards *Ko Muk*, but before we knew it the boat had moored at the haunted pier and we were told to disembark. Now certain that this was the Thai equivalent of the Overlook Hotel, we anxiously awaited the arrival of our boat. At one point a couple of National Park Rangers showed up on a dinghy, and given how cheap our tickets were, and the rough and ready nature of so much Thai transport, we almost climbed aboard thinking that it must be our boat.

Thankfully after half-an-hour or so a speedboat did arrive, and before long we docked at the harbour on the eastern side of *Ko Muk*, which was part of the large fishing village occupying most of that side of the island. We stopped at a small market run by an almost-grumpy-but-not-quite (surely there must be a word for this... Pre-grumpy? Minirritable?) middle-aged man, then began the three kilometre walk across the island to our accommodation at *Mookies*. We passed numerous stilted houses built over swampy, tidal ground just off the road. There was litter absolutely everywhere, significantly worse than anywhere we'd seen to date. In several places you could hardly see the water for the plastic bottles and wrappers floating on it. There were some cute little posters dotted around, encouraging people to just pick up one or two bits of rubbish now and again ("Imagine if we all took one..."), despite the fact that the problem was clearly beyond fixing through *ad hoc* philanthropy.

Anyway. After passing the tsunami evacuation point, we reached *Mookies*, which was composed of an entry veranda in front of a series of bungalows spreading out up the jungly hillside. There were huge butterflies flitting around, some with a wingspan only about an inch or so less than the span of my hand. On the way to our bungalow we met Ben and Maddie, a pair of North Americans (we never figured out whether USA or Canada) who later told us they had contracted COVID-19 on *Ko Lipe*, and had consequently been isolating at *Mookies* for the previous 10 days. Ben was admirably upbeat: "There's delicious Thai food on demand, so I can't complain." Our balcony looked out over the jungle, towards the southern peak of the island. It was very, very humid.

After dropping off our washing---little did we know that Ellen would have to wear my pyjama bottoms in public for the next 48 hours, as the washing was still not dry by the time we left *Ko Muk* because of the rain and humidity---we walked the quarter of a mile or so down to *Haad Farang* (which means "foreigner beach") and got some beers at *Fanta Bar*. They came in little sleeves to help keep them cool: mine was shocking pink and said, "Cheers, Bitches". I was delighted. We met the criminally mulleted man from *Ko Ngai*, who told us that he and his friend had sailed over in his dinghy to do some shopping. Strangely, this seemed to involve them lounging in the sea in exactly the same way they had on *Ko Ngai*, and before long a Thai woman arrived with some plastic bags. They then all climbed into the dinghy and sped off to the northwest.

That evening at *Haad Farang* there was an absolutely glorious sunset: the sun was a soft crimson orb, visible right down to the horizon. Afterwards, we struggled back up the path to *Mookies* in the twilight, terrified we might accidentally harm the tiny little frogs jumping around all over the path. When we got back, we were greeted by yet another fearsome Thai guard dog, a former denizen of the jungle who had been adopted by *Mookies'* owner about three years previously. As we approached, he instantly rolled over onto his back, tail wagging frantically, legs akimbo. For dinner, Ellen had stir-fried veggies with chicken, and I had a dry yellow chicken curry, both of which were very nice. Our all-white canine friend (and his recently adopted, similarly-coloured "girlfriend", as *Mookies'* owner put it) lay near us throughout, occasionally getting overexcited and rearing up like a rampant heraldic animal.

We arranged to rent some kayaks in the morning, so that we could return to the Emerald Cave at a time that we could appreciate it, rather than being distracted by the need to avoid being knocked unconscious against the cave ceiling by the tidal swell. Looking out from our balcony that evening, we could see the beautiful little glowing trails of fireflies, their luciferase hard at work.

## Wednesday 23rd March

We got up for breakfast at 07:30. Ellen had pancakes with banana, pineapple and watermelon; I had chicken congee, mixed fruit, and pineapple juice, and was absolutely stuffed afterwards. We got a lift down to *Haad Farang* on a tuktuk, and set off on our recalcitrant kayak towards the Emerald Cave. We set off at 08:30, and timed it just right, arriving at low tide and narrowly beating the first longtails of the day. The tide was vastly lower [than when we had visited previously](/_posts/2022-03-31-four-islands-tour.md), and we kayaked into the cave network with feet to spare above our heads. The mouth of the cave leading to the *hong* was at least 10 feet above the surface of the water: when we had swum through previously, it had been, at best, less than a foot. We realised then that our boatman's claim that it was "low tide" last time had been complete bullshit.

We spent about 5 minutes alone in the *hong*, which was a very special experience. It was tranquil, notably improved by the absence of piercing shrieks from traumatised, jellyfish-riddled Italian children. Soon we heard the (quite eerie) sound of the first tourist group approaching from within the cave network, and not long afterwards they duly appeared, all clinging to the same little rubber ring that their guide was hauling behind him. As the ear-piercing whine of a drone launched by one of the more obnoxious members of the group filled the limestone chimney, we swiftly decided to bid it farewell.

A little further along the coast was *Sabai Beach*, a small bay accessible by land only after a hefty jungle trek across the hilly ridge on the northern side of the island. Unsurprisingly, after kayaking over we were again alone. A spectacular limestone outcrop towered 200 metres above our heads, and the waves hurled themselves against the crescent of sand near its base. Sadly, this powerful tide had washed ashore thousands of bits of plastic waste, which clung like decaying crumbs to the beard of the jungle, somewhat spoiling the natural beauty of the scene. We kayaked back to *Haad Farang*, arriving in style after an ill-fated attempt to ride a wave capsized us. We dragged the canoe inland before settling at *Mong Bar* for a while.

We returned to *Mookies* with the paddles and lifejackets, and settled down on our jungleside balcony for a few beers and games of cards. We were joined by most of the insect population of Southeast Asia. After our chicken satay sauce was sufficiently enriched by ants, we tried to move inside, but it was unbearably hot and so we returned to the balcony as it teemed down with rain around us. I noticed an *Aedes aegypti* mosquito up to no good on Ellen's forehead: after first giving my apologies (much to her confusion), I proceeded to smack her on the forehead with my open palm. Fortunately I squashed the mosquito in the process so she took it well.

Once the rain had eased off, we headed back down to *Haad Farang*. We stayed there until sunset (less spectacular than the previous evening's), when we noticed a lot of clumsy-looking insects that we took for moths flitting around near our beach umbrella. Strangely, they kept bumping into our faces. We were about to head back to *Mookies* anyway, so we started up the path into the jungle. In the light of our torches, we noticed more and more of them: they were flying into our eyes, noses, ears and mouths. It was quite unpleasant. As we got back to *Mookies*, we noticed the light above the sign on the way in: it was swarming with flying insects, hundreds of them. We watched for a while, amazed at the sheer volume of them.

And then we turned our eyes to the restaurant. There were *thousands* of them surrounding the lights, a magnificently horrific sight. In our enthralled state, we almost stepped on a four-inch scorpion lurking right in the middle of the path. The owner of *Mookies* explained that the swarms waere composed of flying termites, stimulated by the heavy rain to leave their mounds in an effort to found a new colony. Once airborne, they are attracted to light sources. She made a noble effort to set us a table, but in the end, the constant bombardment of insects into our hair, faces, and down our shirts and pants was just too much to bear. Incredibly generously, the owner offered to bring our food up to our bungalow for us.

As we retreated up the hill to our bungalow, we passed a truly wretched guy called Nick who had left his room to complain that it was filled with so many termites, he couldn't continue his online teaching. Nick's desperate pleas for help echoing in our ears, we entered our bungalow in pitch darkness, and proceeded to stuff doormats into any crevices we could find, as well as putting the duvet and our towels over the windows in an effort to black them out. It was the closet I hope I ever come to living through The Blitz. Our food arrived, and as I sat in the dark with it in my lap, I realised that the *Tom Kha* soup I had ordered had not been the best decision. We risked turning on one of the bedside lights (but only after moving it away from the window) and ate our most uncomfortable meal of the holiday so far, off the top of a tiny bedside table whilst sitting on the floor in the gloom.

We finished eating, and thus began, I'm ashamed to say, an indiscriminate massacre of all arthropod life unfortunate enough to cross our paths (which, in our jungle bungalow, amounted to a lot of squashed bugs). We spent the rest of the evening reading about termite life cycles by the light of a phone torch wrapped in a snood. We were relieved to learn that the flying termites shed their wings as soon as they touch something, or land---which explained all the chitinous membranes we'd been picking off our clothes and skin---and that, unless they mate, they normally die within a short time after emerging. Comforted by the knowledge that we would not have to face the biblical swarms again in the morning, we slipped into an uncomfortable sleep.