---
layout: post
title: "Arrival"
date: 2022-03-10 12:40
categories: travel thailand phuket
author: Wil
---

## Phuket Airport

We have arrived!

Passing through arrivals in the airport should have felt bizzare, given all the people in PPE everywhere, but somehow it just felt like the most normal thing in the world. Covid has really done a number on my ability to properly experience reality. After tearfully bidding farewell to the last of our pure Finnish water from Helsinki, we were ushered to an area filled with plastic seats. A woman in PPE asked us to prepare various bits of paperwork---our Thailand Passes, proof of purchase of our RT-PCR tests, our COVID-19 vaccination certificates, passports, and arrival slips---before directing us to a desk, where a man (very hastily) checked over each. For some reason he retained the PCR proof of purchase.

Next, we passed through immigration, and were then directed to another desk just inside the doors to the airport. A woman checked our passports and gave us a tube filled with red liquid in a biohazard bag. Outside the airport, there were three isolator booths that looked like little ice-cream vans: within each were two operators sitting at 90° to each other, sealed inside and wearing full PPE but with their arms in gloves that emerged outwards from the screen, like Homer in the titles of The Simpsons. We each approached one of these, and passed an operator our tube of ruby-coloured liquid through a little hatch. They swabbed our noses and added the sample to the red tube. Afterwards we were given a little *Swab Complete* sticker, and led to a "waiting area" (i.e. the side of the road) where we were to remain until our taxi to the hostel arrived.

The whole process was amazingly efficient: from landing to getting into our taxi took 40 minutes! As I write this, we are well on our way to Phuket Town. The buildings lining the road are wonderfully mismatched in size, design and colour, and are in various stages of dereliction: we passed the eerily beautiful concrete husk of a mosque, like an ossified flower bud.

Still, certainly an upgrade from the A4 route from Bristol Airport into Bath.

## Hostel

We have now arrived at our hostel in Phuket Town, *Book-A-Bed Poshtel*. Our choice was somewhat limited as we had to choose a place that was certified by Thailand's *Safety and Health Administration* as suitable for quarantining travellers under the Thai *Test & Go* scheme, denoted by an **SHA Extra Plus** certification. This took some doing, as for some reason hotels have decided to use a different logo than the one displayed on the SHA's website to indicate this. Anyway, the room is fine, plenty of space and a mezzanine bed. Have to quarantine until we know the results of our PCR tests from this morning. We are both flagging---neither of us slept very well on the flight. It's about 1pm local time, and we are watching some Thai TV in an attempt to stay awake. I don't think it's working as Ellen has nodded off already. (I then fell asleep in the middle of writing something... Looked like "oh no"?!)

### PCR Results

It's now 6pm. The lady at the hotel desk just knocked on our door to tell us that both our PCRs are negative for SARS-CoV-2! We are officially allowed out to see Thailand! All we have to do now is a self-administered lateral flow test on Day 5 of our stay, the result of which we need to report to Thailand's Department for Disease Control using the *Morchana* app.