---
layout: post
title: "Ko Phi Phi"
categories: travel thailand
author: Wil
---

## Saturday 12th March

We got up at 06:45 to hop on the 07:30 transport to the quay---the ferry was due to leave from Phuket Town harbour to Ton Sai harbour on Ko Phi Phi at 09:00. The minibus was late (which we soon learned was the norm in Thailand, rather than the exception). When we arrived at the harbour, there was no ticketing system. We just waved an unofficial-looking bit of paper from the hostel desk at the person on the way in to the terminal, and were given a little red *Ko Phi Phi* sticker for our troubles. While waiting for the ferry, Ellen had a lemon tea which was essentially concentrated lemon juice with a tea bag dipped in it.

A group of people were 'avin it large on the front deck of the ferry. I was horrified to discover that not a single one of them could do the Macarena. Amongst them was a man afflicted with an unfortunately early-onset case of male-pattern baldness: I was very concerned for the well-being of his pate, upon which the sun beat relentlessly for the full 2 hour crossing.

Before docking at Ton Sai on Ko Phi Phi Don (the larger of the two islands), the ferry first did a loop of Ko Phi Phi Leh. It was very pretty, with amazing, sheer limestone cliffs, probably 40--50m high. Some of the limestone karsts nearby almost seem to be floating above the water, such is the effect of tidal erosion on the section at sea-level. Maya Bay (which is where certain scenes from the film *The Beach* were recorded) was particularly lovely, but clearly that hasn't escaped the notice of the tourism industry as it was fairly busy as we cruised past.

To our great relief, it felt much cooler on Ko Phi Phi than it had been in Phuket Town (still roasting but manageable in the shade). After we arrived, we walked left from Ton Sai pier, away from the main town. We had pancakes from a little stall---I accidentally ended up with Nutella on my mango pancake: never turn your back on a person wielding a jar of Nutella. As we sat and ate them, we admired the spectacular limestone cliffs surrounding the bay. We then grabbed a couple of beers at a little place just down the road back towards the town, and were subjected to yet another acoustic Britney Spears cover (this time it was *Hit Me Baby One More Time*).

The main town at Ton Sai was incredibly ramshackle: it was like a shanty town, all wonky shacks and protruding cabling. Apparently 70% of it was destroyed in the 2004 tsunami, so I suppose I oughtn't be too harsh. We wound our way through the warren of streets, past open sewers and fractured paths, before arriving at our accommodation at *Uphill Cottage*, where we came face-to-snout with their fearsome guard dog, who looked like a cross between a pug and the contents of a hoover bag.

The room was fine: it was nice to have somewhere we knew we could unpack and stay put for a few days. One of the first things we noticed was the insane damage prices: get ready to pay £12.50 if you break a clothes hanger, or £50 for the kettle!

The view from our balcony was almost great, over the palm trees and roofs of the myriad buildings scattered over the island, but was somewhat sullied by the presence of an absolute monstrosity of a brown resort hotel that dominated the opposite hillside. (Why did it have to be *brown*?!) There is clearly some big money being poured into specific parts of Ko Phi Phi---there was a huge amount of building work going on along the path to our hotel, seemingly around the clock---with saddeningly predictable results.

That evening, we set off up the mercilessly steep steps towards the series of viewpoints over the island that we had read about. For a small fee we were allowed entry to the first. It was awful. The word *VIEWPOINT* in giant white letters all but obscured the view from the point, and the little remaining view was composed largely of the aforementioned Monstrosity Hotel. Undeterred, we continued on to viewpoint two, which was a considerable improvement on the first, and more importantly, had ice lollies.

We sat and enjoyed the westerly view over Ao Loh Dalum---the north-facing beach on the spit of land connecting the two main parts of Ko Phi Phi Don---for a while, then decided to head up to the third viewpoint that was near the summit of the hill (about 170m above sea level). This path to the third viewpoint was a lot more rugged than the previous stages had been (a helpful chap on a motorbike pointed us in the right direction), and when we got to the top we were greeted by a little wooden platform with some seating. We had to pay another small fee to enter---it didn't feel very official, but then, that seems to be fairly par for the course in Thailand. We stayed and watched the sunset. A muezzin's call to prayer was carried to us from somewhere down the hill, and not long afterwards the local cricket population realised simultaneously that they were overdue to be making a racket, and went absolutely hell for leather.

Back at the second viewpoint, we saw some huge black shapes darting around in the air out over the bay: initially we thought they were birds of prey, but then noticed their erratic flight and the pointed shapes of their wings and realised that they must be enormous bats. Having looked this up since, we think they must have been flying foxes, which are supposedly native to this region.

We had food at Anna's restaurant, who I'm pretty sure have used Walt Disney's handwriting when styling their sign. I had fried rice with pork, pineapple and raisins served inside half a pineapple---it was amazing---and Ellen had a green curry. Afterwards we headed over to Ao Loh Dalum. I gather this is usually the hot spot for Ko Phi Phi nightlife, but walking there, it was very quiet and most bars along the path to the beach were closed.

The first bar we came to was Slinky, where there was a fire spinner show on: several men performed some very impressive acrobatic feats with various things (staffs, balls on chains, skipping ropes) that had been dunked in a viscous, inflammable material and set alight. Some of the braver viewers were invited on to the stage for a closer encounter: we decided to just watch, and had some beers and a piña colada each. At the same time, there was an absolutely huge thunderstorm taking place out over the sea to the north: there were some incredible forks of lightning being hurled earthwards. My favourite part of the evening was the limbo: when the bar was at its lowest, nobody managed to get under it until two guys---one of whom did the limboing, the second of whom was held sideways by the first, like a freshly caught fish, as a counterweight---managed it. I feel genuinely proud to have witnessed such an amazing feat of ingenuity.

After a while, we headed along the beach to Freedom Bar (or Free Dombar as the sign appeared) and had a few more beers. On the way, we passed two people in a very well-lit part of the sea for whom a lack of privacy was clearly not an obstacle to expressing their great love for one another. I tried not to think about the bits of broken shell that were everywhere. While at Free Dombar, we observed a concerned-yet-sober-looking man ankle-deep in the sea, who appeared to have lost something. He was speaking to somebody on his phone for a very long time. We puzzled over what he might have lost for a while, before noticing *another* privacy-averse couple risking serious knee and buttock lacerations from coral fragments, again in full view of the beach bars.

Not long afterwards, we saw the concerned man---now topless and tattooed---race another man to the sea before engaging in a wrestling match. (Concerned Man won.) Not long afterwards, he was roaming the beach whilst shadow boxing. I was impressed at how quickly he had managed to totally lose it. We decided it was time to call it a night, and headed home by about 01:00.

## Sunday 13th March

Pretty uneventful day today! Which was probably my fault, as I woke up very late (12pm). We walked back down into the town and had some breakfast (almond croissants) at *23° Coffee*, another western-style coffee place. We vowed to stop being awful tourists and to stop visiting such places. Afterwards we made our way down to Ao Loh Dalum---now mercifully free of any public fornication---and lounged a bit on the beach.

We got some beers from the *P. P. Princess Hotel*, and spent a while admiring the numerous cats wandering around. Ko Phi Phi was absolutely awash with cats: under the tables in restaurants, loafing on the street, or just wiped out in the shade and on ferry booking counters. We later learned that, because of Covid-19, a lot of people up and left Ko Phi Phi, leaving their fuzzfriends behind. As such, the feral cat population has increased hugely, and many locals are now trying their best to care for them. The cats all seemed pretty happy, and were well-tolerated by everyone---even when mercilessly meowing at tourists for scraps of their food.

We headed over to the comfy deckchairs of Free Dombar for another Singha. There was an absolutely adorable black Labrador puppy sitting on a bench between our deck chairs and the toilet, who turned to waggy jelly every time we passed him. Throwing all rabies avoidance advice and better judgement to the wind, we fussed him many times. He even managed to sneakily lick me on the chin: I am yet to develop hydrophobia, so think I'm in the clear.

Not long afterwards, a tropical rainstorm moved in and we got absolutely soaked to the skin (which was actually quite pleasant in the mid-March heat of Southern Thailand). We decided to shelter in *One Noodle* where we both got some Pad Thai, then went to a local convenience store to grab some beers to take back to the hotel room. We trekked back up the hill to our room, where we spent the rest of the evening drinking Singha, and making plans for the rest of the trip whilst reading our guidebook.

## Monday 14th March

Today, we made a much more respectable start at 09:00. We searched for breakfast: eventually, after much dilly-dallying on my part (by which Ellen was not impressed), we settled on a little place on a corner whose name I haven't written down. I had yellow noodles with chicken, and Ellen had a banana pancake.

We then hired a kayak for three hours, and took it out to a few spots around the coast: first stop was Monkey Beach, where the local macaque population appeared to be having a tussle over a can of Pringles. We then kayaked over to Ao Nui, where we did a bit of snorkelling. I'm no marine biologist, so don't really know what exactly we saw, but there were some fabulously colourful fish, a few hermit crabs, and Ellen saw a lobster. Also present were sea cucumbers, truly hideous organisms that resembled what life might have been like if H. R. Giger had been responsible for drawing up the blueprints. These ones were about 20--30cm long, perhaps. I sincerely hope that they don't get much bigger. I was not sorry to leave them behind when we left the bay, but am now acutely aware that the ocean is absolutely teeming with their monstrous, pulsating forms. I also think I might have eaten one when in Japan (before I knew what they looked like), which for my own sanity I'm trying not to think about too much.

The final stop on our kayaking tour was Ao Loh Lana. We didn't go all the way to the beach as we didn't have time, but we saw the shanty town where it appeared some of the longtail boatmen lived (longtail boats are named for the lengthy propeller shaft that juts from the automobile engine used to manoeuvre the craft). I think this must have been a chao ley settlement. Our guidebook tells me that the chao ley are a semi-nomadic ethnic group who probably came to southern Thailand from the Malay/Indonesian arcchipelago a few centuries ago. There are further divisions within this group---including the Urak Lawoy people, who appear to be the most "assimilated" into Thai culture---and many of them do not have formal Thai citizenship, so still live very independent lives, removed from larger settlements. Some of them even live and work aboard their longtail boats.

Once we returned from our kayaking, we went to Free Dombar again. Ellen had chips, and I had banana pancake. We each also had a *very* welcome Singha. As it was Day 5 after our arrival, we then returned to the hotel room to do our Covid-19 lateral flow tests as require by the Thailand Pass conditions (even though there was nowhere to report them within the app that we'd been instructed to use to report the results). We just took a photo of the test instead. Once these were done, we headed over to Papaya's for food. Ellen had a chicken panang, and I had a beef massaman. I had the holy trinity of lager: Leo, Chang and Singha. We're pretty sure that Leo and Singha are just the exact same lager in different bottles. For dessert, we had sticky rice with mango... It. Was. Glorious. (My original note here just said "OMG".) At one point we could hear an amazing singalong to Radiohead's *Creep* from a nearby bar; the bridge was particularly good (i.e. brilliantly awful). Just before we left, the restaurant put on what appeared to be a Bollywood music channel, and so we enjoyed some cracking singing and percussion while finishing our beers and waiting for the bill.

The town was again very quiet, but we eventually stumbled across a bar called *Rosniyom* where there was a Thai chap doing guitar and vocal covers of various pop songs (which weirdly included *Creep* again, during which a young moustachioed Italian guy took to the stage and sang along, in a heroic but ultimately misguided attempt to impress the girl he was with). There was a very raucous and excited table carrying the night, who were singing along to most things and who eventually started dancing all over the place. We stayed for a few beers there while watching the middle table get more and more rowdy, which was great. Despite the aforementioned rowdiness, the atmosphere was actually pretty relaxed: the barman was drinking with one of the other tables, and his cat was strutting around demanding fuss.

Earlier we had passed an oldish man playing guitar in the street outside *Garlic 1992*, a restaurant entirely inexplicably graced with the presence of a cartoon Mr Bean on its sign. Whilst in Rosniyom, we became aware of a sound like a helium-filled raven shrieking the monstrous "It's Christmas" line from Slade's *Merry Xmas Everybody*: it turned out to be the very same gentleman, still wielding his guitar, but now engaged in a one-man war against the eardrum of the young man crouching next to him. Things had begun to quieten down, so we decided to make the walk up to the hotel for the last time, and started preparing for the speedboat to Ko Lanta at 09:20 the next morning.