---
layout: post
title: "The Four Islands Tour"
categories: travel thailand
author: Wil
---

## Saturday 19th March

With characteristically Thai punctuality, our *songthaew*---a rickety, open-backed bus (of sorts)---picked us up in the morning and bounced us over to the pier at Lanta's Old Town. As we trundled past the ramshackle dwellings on the eastern side of the island, I was suddenly struck by how much the heaps of bric-a-brac piled outside reminded me of my dearly missed Grampa's garage. My reverie was shattered by an august young Swedish girl sitting opposite in her big sister's lap, who---her father soon explained---repeatedly asked me (in Swedish) whether I understood her: clearly, she did not take my slack-jawed looks of confusion as sufficient answer.

There was a large crowd gathered at the pier, and after some minor confusion (the songthaew driver had kept the ticket) we climbed aboard a longtail boat. Our twenty-five or so fellow passengers were a mixed lot: we were located between a woman whose inner ear evidently did not appreciate the ebb and flow of open water, and an Italian family whose son, Flavio, was not a happy chappy. As we sped off away from the harbour, I was disappointed to see the pilot, whose livelihood and existence are inextricably linked to the oceans, flick a cigarette end off the boat into the waves. What's better than an ocean infested with plastic? An ocean infested with carcinogen-infested plastic!

Our first stop on the tour was *Ko Ma*, a limestone karst about a mile off the eastern shore of *Ko Ngai*, where the boat pulled in to allow us to do some snorkelling. Almost as soon as we had stopped, a sizeable Italian gentleman hurled himself from the deck into the sea belly-first with a resounding splat. (To his credit, he was then surprisingly graceful once he was in the water.) Being the big sissy wet blanket that I am---I wouldn't even jump into the swimming pool as a child---I donned my life jacket and flippers and clumsily stumbled my way across the deck, stepping on people's feet as I went, and gingerly descended the ladder into the water.

The visibility was already quite poor, and even worse, I quickly learned that spectacles and snorkelling masks are not natural bedfellows. The mask did not form a complete seal around the arms of my glasses, and so filled up gradually with water every time I dunked my face under the water. And just to make sure I *really* couldn't see anything, my glasses also steamed up for good measure. I really felt quite pathetic. To my delight, Ellen also kept warning me that she could see jellyfish---I couldn't see anything---and would swim off to lead me away from them, but I kept losing track of where she'd gone due to my near-blindness. When we later investigated the areas of my skin that were burning quite fiercely, we found a few little hair-like spines that our undulating friends had likely deposited.

We climbed back aboard---dodging the large jellyfish lurking by the ladder, and the vomit of the woman sitting next to me---and were taken to our second stop at *Ko Chueak*, another limestone karst about a mile southeast, for some more snorkelling. Our Italian diver again took straight to the water (substantially more elegantly this time), and, driven by bloody-minded determination to see *some* marine life, I again descended the ladder into the sea. Fortunately it was *far* clearer here, right to the sea floor about 4--5 metres below us, and the only drifting, potentially hostile objects we needed to dodge were the groups of snorkellers clinging to rubber rings being dragged around by their guides. Near the submarine foot of the karst was an enormous shoal of hundreds of silver fish, each about five inches in length, that flowed to-and-fro like flickering quicksilver. I enjoyed watching these during the brief intervals between putting on my mask and it filling up with water. After a while, one of the boatmen who was swimming with us called out to draw our attention: he had spotted some clownfish pottering about on the sea floor, so Ellen dived down to have a closer look. I just about managed to see one from the surface, which was fantastic.

Back to the boat, and the main event of the tour was underway: a trip to the widely-celebrated *Emerald Cave* on *Ko Muk*. On the other side of the cave was a *hong*---a limestone chimney formed when the former cave roof fell in, whose walls were covered in myriad plant species, and at the base of which was a lagoon---accessible only by swimming through the cave complex. As someone whose swimming ability is comparable to my ability to fly, the prospect of this didn't fill me with enthusiasm, but I figured it couldn't be too bad given the number of tourists it draws. The little eagerness that I had left was rapidly replaced with trepidation when, having climbed into the water and searched in vain for the cave entrance, it was revealed that the jagged, tide-lashed, pitch-black, one-foot gap I had taken for a bit of erosion at the base of the limestone was, in fact, our way in.

Our guide swiftly made his way towards the cave entrance, keen to get ahead of the enormous tourist boat that had arrived moments before us. I hesitated momentarily, trying to decide whether or not to get back on the boat, when I noticed Flavio in the water with his father. Keen not to be outdone by a two-year-old Italian child, I set off after our guide. When we reached the entrance, we had to carefully time our swim to avoid being bashed against the sharp rocks above by the tidal swell. Inside, the ceiling of the cave was now---to my great relief---at least 8 metres above our heads, and rather than being pitch black as I'd assumed, an incredibly beautiful, ethereal turquoise light was filtering up into the cave from below. It shimmered in an otherworldly manner, like an aurora, or how light is refracted by jellyfish in an aquarium. It was stunning.

Sadly we could not linger there long: the dim torchlight of our guide was retreating into the cave ahead, and so we swam on after him. After passing through another low passage, using one arm to keep myself from becoming too closely acquainted with the rocks above, we were swiftly plunged into near-total darkness. Our guide swung his torch beam upwards, revealing scores of bats hanging from the cave ceiling about 10 metres above our heads, like tiny stalactites. A short distance further and we reached another low arch, the final passage through to the lagoon. This one was being absolutely pummelled by the swell, and the water level was barely dropping below the apex of the arch, even at its lowest point. At this point, some of the more sensible members of our group decided to turn back.

Unfortunately, this triggered a very confusing episode: a disembodied voice from the darkness started shouting "Back to boat!", taking with it the primary light source. Our other guide was nowhere to be seen in the darkness, so I had absolutely no idea where everyone else had gone. Floating in a cave in near-total darkness, in water of unknown depth, below a ceiling of unknown height, at an unknown point in the oscillation of the tides, I felt genuine fear for the first time since I can remember. It was uncannily like the sensation when an aircraft levels after take off, except accompanied by (horribly literal) blind panic. I called out to Ellen, trying to keep the panic in my voice in check, and almost immediately she took my hand in the darkness. I instantly felt the panic recede: words can't describe how glad I was that she was there.

Gathering our courage, we approached the entrance to the lagoon. As our eyes adjusted to the gloom, by the small amount of light filtering through, we noticed our guide floating near the archway. He shouted at us to wait. After several crashes of the tide, he signalled for us to dive underwater and swim through. I spent a split second trying to figure out the logistics of using my arms to simultaneouly swim, hold on to Ellen, defend my head from the rocks above, and hold onto my glasses, before just grabbing my glasses with both hands, dunking my head under and kicking madly with my flippered feet.

When I surfaced (glasses still sitting firmly on the bridge of my nose), I saw Ellen floating in front of me in perfectly clear azure water, surrounded by the other members of our group who had braved the entrance to the lagoon. From within the cave behind us, we could hear the quite reasonably hysterical shouting of Flavio, who eventually emerged from the mouth of the cave clutched by his seemingly oblivious father, who promptly left him with a group of French tourists and swam back to inflict the same fate on his young daughter (whose real name we sadly didn't catch, but who we decided to call Flavietta). In spite of what he had just put him through, Flavio continued to desperately shout for his father the whole time he was gone.

Once Flavietta surfaced from the waters of the lagoon, however, Flavio looked the pinnacle of stoicism. She was---again, entirely reasonably---*beside herself*: not only had she been dragged under seething water in the darkness against her will, she had also been stung by a jellyfish. What had moments before been an oasis of calm was now like standing within the bell of Maynard Ferguson's trumpet, as her screams ricocheted off the walls of the limestone chimney. I was grateful that the roof had already caved in.

Our boatman approached her and tried to pat some sand on her sting (a note to anyone reading: this is not recommended for jellyfish stings), but she withdrew and became even more hysterical. Her father was speaking loudly in Italian and gesticulating wildly, and started to vigorously rub sand into the poor girl's leg, in what was presumably a well-meaning effort to help ease her pain... Although given what else he put his children through, I'm not so sure. (Again, to anyone reading, this is definitely not recommended as it might cause further release of venom from any nematocysts still clinging to the skin.) As the abuse continued, a sudden gust of wind blew in, which made our boatman suddenly glance concernedly over his shoulder, his brow knitted in a frown. This didn't really do much for our enthusiasm towards the prospect of leaving the lagoon: the knowledge that we would have to swim back through the cave was already challenging our ability to relax and enjoy the stunning natural beauty that surrounded us, so adding wind and rain and consequently choppier waters to the equation did not fill our hearts with joy.

Swiftly our boatman took to the water, swimming back towards the mouth of the cave. Begrudgingly we followed. We were nervous. Flavietta was still gulping back tears (quite unsuccessfully): I don't know what her dad said or did to get her back in the water, but his diplomacy skills must be legendary. We swam back into the cave, somewhat more easily this time, and gathered in the darkness to await the rest of our tour group. Flavio was being carried by his father---who was not wearing a life jacket---and his big sister had been placed on top of a rubber ring, pulled by another member of the group, quite possibly the large (but unrelated) Italian man. She was not pleased, and continued to gibber in Italian, between gulps of tears, until we were back on the boat.

The swim out of the cave was significantly less terrifying than it had been on the way in, but by the time we made it to the arch leading to the sea outside the cave, the tide was *hammering* the rocks and it was quite a challenge to swim out against it. I was extremely grateful for my flippers. By this time it had also started lashing with rain, and the wind-driven waves were washing over us as we floated in the sea waiting for our longtail boat to reappear. The constant shouts of "Flavio! Flaaavio!" interspersed with machine-gun Italian had at this point faded almost into the background, but when we finally looked over, Flavio Sr. was barely afloat, his face alone visible above the water. Ellen offered to take Flavio, who was swiftly surrendered and given a lifejacket to hang on to. Before too long, our boat approached, and one-by-one we climbed the ladder onto the deck, flopping into our seats with great relief. Flavio and Flavietta were reunited with their mother, who had been safely on the boat the entire time. I sincerely hope I am never stranded at sea in need of rescue, because from this comparatively tame experience of bobbing around in churning water, I can confidently say that I would be absolutely consumed with terror. I am definitely a land-lubber, through-and-through.

Little of note happened on the return journey, or perhaps our addled minds just couldn't really process it. The poor woman next to me looked *awful* as we bounded across the choppy sea, and although the rain had stopped, we all got drenched by the waves. Soon enough, though, we were back at *Ko Ngai* beach, where an excellent massaman curry was served by the boatmen. Not long after we'd finished gobbling it up---terror is quite the appetite-builder, it seems---the heavens again opened, so we said our goodbyes to the group and made our way towards the southern end of the beach, where *Kaimuk Thong*, our home for the next few days, awaited our arrival.