---
layout: post
title: "Trang"
categories: travel thailand
author: Wil
---

## Thursday 24th of March

Upon emerging from our *Ko Muk* bungalow early in the morning, we were both extremely relieved to find that the termites had gone. The owner of *Mookies* had booked us onto the 08:00 ferry to the mainland, so we stuffed our still-soggy washing into our bags (Ellen was still wearing my pyjama shorts) and had a quick breakfast of muesli---with some presumably unintentionally added protein in the form of maggots---before being whisked by tuktuk back through the town to the pier. At one point, the narrow road was completely blocked by a maintenance vehicle. I briefly worried that we would miss our ferry, but my concerns were short-lived as our driver took a shortcut across the adjacent hospital's lawn and through a gap in the fence.

We were directed onto the first proper ferry we had seen so far, which was a somewhat unsettlingly constructed two-tiered vessel that appeared to be held together by little more than questionable welding and goodwill. The starboard handrail was quite noticeably absent from the top deck. Firmly settling ourselves portside, we were almost instantly filled with regret thar we might not fall into the sea and drown, as a man near us would not stop talking about his precious hospitality demands---even going so far as to stipulate (at length) his non-negotiable requirement for cotton, *not* polyester, sheets.

Fortunately, the poor man being subjected to his drivel soon got bored, and we were spared from further anti-synthetic diatribes for the rest of the journey. About halfway across the stretch of shallow sea between *Ko Muk* and the mainland, we saw dozens of large jellyfish floating in their typically otherworldly manner just below the surface. (I always hear *The Aquarium* from *Carnival of the Animals* in my head whenever I see jellyfish, probably a symptom of spending too much time in sea-life centres as a child. At least it's not Jean-Michelle Jarre.)

Our ferry made its way into a heavily-mangroved river mouth, and shortly we arrived at the small concrete jetty at *Kuangtungku*, onto which we alighted via a nerve-shreddingly pliable two-metre wooden plank held in place by the crew. In typical fashion we didn't really have a clue what was now happening in terms of transport, other than the fact that the ticket inspector on the ferry had jabbed at his chest with his forefinger after seeing our tickets. After he disappeared inland on foot, we took decisive action by quietly mingling on the pier with a few other passengers, casting occasional nervous glances towards the battered old open-backed bus lurking nearby.

Soon enough, however, Ticket Man reappeared behind the wheel of a minivan, reversing at an impressive pace towards the pier's edge. We hopped in, and by 10:00 had arrived at *Trang*, a small and fairly unremarkable city other than for its chinese-influenced breakfasts of chargrilled pork with rice, and its fabulously cheap dim sum, which we enjoyed at a small cafe near the station called *Kopi*.

We walked the mile or so across town to *Nokhook Guest House*, which was a really delightful little place, whose owner even gave us a lift to the airport the following morning for no extra cost. The only slightly disconcerting thing about the place was the Chairman Mao cushion in the room. We decided to get a sleeper train to Bangkok the following afternoon, and so set out back towards the train station to buy our tickets, seeing on the way what *Trang* has to offer.

Turns out, not much. The main tourist attraction seemed to be an underwhelming clock tower. (Admittedly, there was a large fountain covered in statues of dugong(s?), thanks to which I have learned that they have forked tails, unlike manatees whose tails are rounded.) Most places were shut, we assumed because of Covid-19 but there was no real way to tell. We managed to get some brioche buns with various fillings (pork, pineapple, taro and pandan cream), and then had a drink at *1952 Cafe* whilst searching online for anywhere else in the city we could go. Unfortunately, by the time we had left, the train station had closed. Despite stuffing ourselves with so much brioche we weren't really hungry, we wandered over to a restaurant called *See Far*, planning on capitalising on ethanol's appetite-stimulating properties to help us along. Our plan was foiled by the absence of beer from the restaurant, despite the menus being plastered with the *Chang* logo. Somewhat embarrassingly we left, in the confusion trying to explain we'd return later when we were more hungry.

We got some Singha from a 7-eleven (where a very excited Thai man went to great pains to tell us that Singha was "Number One!"), and went back to our room to rethink our plans. We decided instead to book a flight from *Trang* to *Chiang Mai* in the north of Thailand. Once this was done and we'd sorted accommodation, we sauntered back over to *See Far*, which had, unfortunately, closed early. On the way over we had spotted a night market, whose delicious biriyani turned out to be a very welcome alternative. We weren't brave enough to try the fried maggots or crickets/grasshoppers on sale.

As we returned to our room for the night, we saw three men in a public park playing what looked like a combination of keepie-uppies and basketball: they seemed to be trying to get a football into one of three nets hanging about five metres above them, the openings of which were at about 120° from each other, whilst keeping the ball from hitting the floor. It was very impressive, especially when I considered how I would fare in an attempt at kicking a ball into one of the nets, even from hand. Before we went to bed, we had some very minor drama with the supply of water to our room---it turned out the pump had overheated---which is only worth mentioning because when I told the husband of the owner, he made the most fabulously expressive gesture with little more than his eyes and one hand, instantly and unmistakably conveying the message, "Don't worry: I got this." The language barrier was rendered entirely irrelevant.

## Friday 25th of March

*Nokhook* offered a buffet breakfast, which included some very oddly textured pandan jelly, like green silken tofu, wrapped in a leaf. After I'd forced it down, the owner helped me arrange printing the booking confirmation for our flights, while Ellen entertained the big softy of a hostel cat who was inexplicably named "Fight" (we double-checked). Soon we hopped into the owner's car, and---after a death-defying dash across a bustling Thai road to collect our printed documents---we were at the airport before we knew it.

