---
layout: post
title: "Ko Muk"
categories: travel, thailand, komuk
author: Wil
---

## Tuesday 22nd March

Longtail at 11:00 from beach outside Kaimuk Thong
Dropped us at Ko Ngai Resort Pier---we thought it was taking us all the way! Then had to wait about half an hour for the speedboat to arrive, classic Thai transport.
We landed at the harbour on the east side of Ko Muk, which was part of the large fishing village occupying most of this side of the island. We stopped at a small market run by a semi-grumpy middle-aged man, then began the 3km walk across the island to our accommodation at *Mookies*. We passed many stilted houses built over swampy, tidal ground just off the road. There was litter absolutely everywhere, significantly worse than anywhere we'd seen to date. In several places you could hardly see the water for the plastic bottles and wrappers floating on it. After passing the tsunami evacuation point, we reached *Mookies*, which was composed of an entry veranda in front of a series of bungalows spreading out up the jungly hillside. There were huge butterflies flitting around, some with a wingspan only about an inch or so less than the span of my hand. On the way to our bungalow we met Ben and Maddie, a pair of North Americans who later told us they had contracted COVID-19 on Ko Lipe, and had consequently been isolating for the previous 10 days.

Haad Farang (beach)---beers and sunset. Cheers Bitches. Absolutely glorious sunset, crimson orb visible right to the horizon. Back to *Mookies*, Ellen had stir-fried veggies with chicken, I had dry yellow chicken curry. Very nice. We arranged to rent some kayaks from the owner in the morning, so that we could return to the Emerald Cave at a time that we could appreciate it, rather than being somewhat distracted by the need to avoid being knocked unconscious against the cave ceiling by the tidal swell. We also hoped there would be fewer hysterical Italian children this time.

## Wednesday 23rd March

Breakfast at 07:30: Ellen had pancakes with banana, pineapple and watermelon; I had chicken congee, mixed fruit, and pineapple juice. We got a lift down to the beach on a tuktuk, and set off on our recalcitrant kayak towards Emerald Cave at 08:30. We timed it just right, narrowly beating the first longtails of the day. The tide was *considerably* lower this time. The mouth of the cave leading to the *hong* was at least 10 feet high: when we had swum through previously, it had been a foot at best.

We spent about 5 minutes alone in the *hong*, which was a very special experience. It was tranquil, and notably improved by the absence of piercing shrieks from terrified, jellyfish-riddled children. Soon we heard the (quite eerie) sound of the first tourist group approaching from within the cave network, and not long afterwards they duly appeared, all clinging to the same little rubber ring that their guide was hauling behind him. As the ear-piercing whine of a drone launched by one of the more obnoxious members of the group filled the *hong*, we swiftly decided to bid it farewell.

